look the sapir-whorf hypothesis the
theory of linguistic relativity it is
the philosophy of a highly eccentric
individual named Benjamin Whorf and it
incorporated data and examples from
separate research done by a guy named
Sapir so this video is directed towards
the philosophy of Worf and it's not what
you think it is it's not what people say
it is in the universities and it's now
people say it is on YouTube either this
is a really strange example of a theory
that's been completely divorced from the
words and intentions of the author who
invented it partly just for the
entertainment and edification of
undergraduate students partly I don't
know so professors can feel there's
something really profound and important
in the science of linguistics itself
something more powerful than the study
of culture or history perhaps I don't
really know what motivates the people
who are playing this game but the point
of this video is to show you that people
are playing games not just here on
YouTube but even in PhD programs in
linguistics the world needs to know how
far we trip sit away from what the
actual sapir-whorf hypothesis was so the
idea that the language you speak shapes
the way that you see the world is really
intuitive after all if you know the
difference between a guitar and a bass
but I don't we're gonna have a pretty
different way of talking about our
favorite bands so this is the type of
seemingly profound and provocative claim
that's tacked on to the sapir-whorf
hypothesis and it's actually completely
utterly irrelevant to the real
intellectual legacy and thesis that
Benjamin Whorf worked so hard to set
down what was it this guy had to say
let's jump in here let's go to a smoking
gun quotation here you go oh
he believes in quote a world of
hyperspace a world of higher dimensions
you see that this doesn't sound stupid
and crazy to you yet stick around this
video is gonna get stupider and crazier
as it says on the left highlighted
yellow Wharf called it the principle of
linguistic relativity because he saw the
ideas having implications similar to
instance principle of physical
relativity this is a mystical
transcendental over-the-top crazy theory
this guy really was a religious
eccentric indulging in his own strange
spiritual view of life on earth that has
nothing to do with linguistics as a
legitimate science and has nothing to do
even with the kinds of petty but
profound questions that professors are
kind of trying to inspire their their
undergraduate students to ask oh look at
this on screen you could read the whole
thing if you want to hmm yes yeah yeah
yeah hmm the inner affinity of language
and the the cosmic order that that
sounds legit to you guys what was the
original premise behind all of this
pseudo spiritual pontificating uh oh
yeah right we could actually read his
thesis his essay actually does open with
a thesis statement as good undergraduate
essay should
so yeah um the various sciences in
proliferating highly specialized
languages I suppose to communicate their
ideas the various Sciences have become
mutually incomprehensible
right and this isn't just a problem for
communication between the sciences he
claims like it's not just difficult for
someone in chemistry to communicate with
some of the physics the problem is this
is actually distorting the perception of
reality by scientists themselves and to
some extent distorting the perception of
reality in all of Western society in the
age of the dominance of science and this
is a problem a problem that impedes
scientific progress and impedes the
transformation of our society and he he
is gonna solve this problem with his
brilliant spiritual insight into the
relationship between language and cosmic
the cosmic order of reality yeah
remember that a world of hyperspace of
higher
dimensions he's going to talk to us
about related this is this is basically
part of the founding of a new religion
and guess where it was published it was
published in the overtly insane Journal
of theosophy run by a cult group created
by a well-known psychic charlatan helena
blavatsky if you don't believe me look
it up even Wikipedia will debunk this
nonsense you can read what I've put here
on on Street for you
yeah it wasn't just crazy it was also
kind of racist but hey let's go back to
let's go back to our respectable
youtuber who does a respectable job of
summarizing the kind of nonsense that
will be on your final exam if you are
right now an undergraduate student
wading through the petty deep waters of
the sapir-whorf hypothesis as it's been
I don't know diluted and watered down
for your consumption the strongest
version of this is usually called
linguistic determinism because it says
that the way that we think isn't just
influenced by our language it's totally
100% determined by it it's also known as
the sapir-whorf hypothesis because of a
couple of important researchers who
pioneered the topic edward sapir and
Benjamin Lee Whorf now this idea raises
some interesting questions like if words
shape how you see the world can there be
anything resembling accurate translation
between languages / if you speak more
than one language is your worldview
significantly different between them but
let's leave those for now and start with
some really famous research done in the
1930s by Worf
he studied grammatical structures from
Native American languages and compared
them with English and other European
languages one of the languages he looked
at was Hopi spoken in northern Arizona
and specifically how people talk about
time in that language logically the way
your eyeballs and brain bits see colors
should be basically the same whether you
live in Toronto or Taipei or whether you
speak Mandarin or Mongolian it's just
biology right well to a proponent of
linguistic determinism not right the
words you have for colors should totally
influence what colors you're able to
perceive there's actually been a lot of
research on this it turns out that not
every language has the same number of
color terms you can see in this way the
academic discipline of linguistics just
turn
this into a Pandora's box of unlimited
petty deep anecdotes about things that
happen to be slightly interesting about
linguistic asymmetry what was wharfs
original crazy idea it was an idea about
the relationship between the linguistic
order and the cosmic order it's
completely clear in his own words if
anyone's reading his own words and
definitely nobody is alright and what
does everyone pretend his idea was they
pretend that it's not a two-way street
between a linguistic order and a cosmic
order they pretend instead the theory of
linguistic relativity was a one-way
street about the linguistic order
imposing itself on culture imposing
itself on politics and imposing itself
even on cognition
now look Wharf didn't make up this not a
no highly eccentric religious worldview
starting with a blank sheet of paper if
you read his writing carefully he tells
you what his sources were right so here
you go the author's intent matters he's
here citing who's Pinsky's book a new
model of the universe who was Zeus
penske ah it was one of the early
proponents of the peculiar new religious
movement or cult group of Gurdjieff I
don't know how far you want to go down
the rabbit hole on this one crazy cult
group leads to another leads to another
what does he take from Gurdjieff you see
here highlighted in yellow part of his
philosophy or worldview was undermining
people's ingrained patterns of thought
right so they have these seven all
mystical zen-like moments of
breakthrough or insight all right well
that doesn't sound too bad or too evil
as crazy cult groups go you know
whatever I've heard of worse you could
imagine for someone like Worf whose
whole approach to language was talking
about patterns and in green habits of
thought and how those shape your percept
the world and the possibility of jarring
you out of them to have profound insight
wharfs view of reality was precisely
about the ways in which those patterns
of thought were and were not linked to
the cosmic order hyperspace as he puts
it alternate dimensions perception of
reality etc etc and he really was
interested in yogic transcendental
insights he says it himself it's in his
paper he talks about Sanskrit at Hindu
traditions of yoga he was interested in
zen-like moments of transcendence so
whatever you can make fun of it to some
extent or you can you can take it for
what it's worth what it is not
it's a scientific hypothesis it has
nothing to do with the science of
linguistics no matter how you define it
has nothing to do with what it's
supposed to be about in academia today
quote we saw in part one but in
linguistic and mental phenomena
significant behavior or what is the same
both behavior and significance so far as
they're interlinked are ruled by a
specific system or organization a
quote-unquote geometry characteristic of
each language this organization is
imposed from outside the narrow circle
of the personal consciousness making of
that consciousness I'm your puppet whose
linguistic maneuverings are held in
unsent and unbreakable bonds of pattern
so look it is what it is guarded as the
start of a new religion or you can
regard it as a crazy extension and
sequel to some other religions the wirdy
around like namely that of Helena
Blavatsky and Gurdjieff and whose penske
that was the crowd he was rolling with
and those the people who was trying to
make a positive impression upon um it is
certainly very sad to see I mean look
here on screen you've got Sanskrit Hindu
spirituality rolled in with the rest of
it it's certainly very sad to see that
his actual hypothesis is being
misrepresented as if his theory was that
the US government should force everyone
to learn English on the contrary what he
says here is that Western culture has
gone as
far as it possibly can and mullah
randomizers quoting verbatim quote the
commitment to illusion has been sealed
in western indo-european language and
the road out of illusion for the West
lies through a wider understanding of
language than Western your indo-european
languages alone can give this is the
mantra yoga of Western consciousness the
next great step which it is now ready to
take so you was interested in Native
American languages and Asian languages
precisely in shaking you out of the
slumber of your monolingual ignorance so
you could have this profound insight
into reality and hey maybe for some of
you you know that doesn't sound too bad
in closing this video let's come back to
the issue of race and racism which has
kind of haunted this from several
different angles the idea that your
language shapes how you think was really
influential for a while but
unfortunately it had some disastrous
consequences and not only in Europe in
fact some of the most destructive
linguistic policies in America arose
from the idea that indigenous language
communities should be replaced by
civilized European languages and those
policies were really ruinous according
to the MIT indigenous language
initiative of the roughly 300 Native
American languages that once existed
only 165 remain and of those 80% have
under 1000 speakers left I mean there
are three times more Hungarian speakers
in the US than speakers of the most
populous Native American language Navajo
and while we're not laying all the blame
for this at the feet of ideas linking
language to worldview they did make a
contribution so this is really
unfortunate I don't know to what extent
he's being honest or dishonest but this
is the exact opposite of who Benjamin
Whorf was Worf was a kind of spiritual
seeker and he was out there trying to
romanticize Native American culture
that's really what this research was
doing he was claiming oh the Native
Americans have a different way of
perceiving time and thinking about the
future and this is reflected their
language he was also trying to
romanticize a lot of religions of East
Asia
he was obviously fascinated by Hindu
philosophy and to some
and put his philosophy and so on it's
hurtful for his work he really was a
hippy spiritual seeker of his time who
dabbled in linguistics and who
romanticized and put on a pedestal the
value of indigenous American language so
it's it's really sad it's really
shameful for his legacy even though I've
just come out and told you I regard that
says as kind of insane and twisted and a
member of a stupid spiritual cult group
nevertheless credit where it's due
this was not one of the evil
imperialists on the wrong side of
history this was a guy who saw a lot of
value in Native American languages and
he was studying he was studying them for
precisely these spiritual reasons
[Music]